# Contents
[[2.2 Acids, Bases and Alkalis#2 2 1 Acids|2.2.1 Acids]]  
[[2.2 Acids, Bases and Alkalis#2 2 2 Bases and Alkalis|2.2.2 Bases and Alkalis]]  
[[2.2 Acids, Bases and Alkalis#2 2 3 Predicting Observations|2.2.3 Predicting Observations]]  
[[2.2 Acids, Bases and Alkalis#2 2 4 Salt Preparation|2.2.4 Salt Preparation]]  
[[2.2 Acids, Bases and Alkalis#2 2 5 Ionic Equations|2.2.5 Ionic Equations]]  

---
## 2.2.1 Acids
[[Module 2#2 2 Acids Bases and Alkalis|Definitions]]  
Strong Acids:
- Strong acids dissociate fully in solution so that all the ions are separate. 
  $HCl_{(aq)}\rightarrow H^+_{(aq)}+Cl^-_{(aq)}$
- Some acids release more than one hydrogen ion - these are always strong acids.
$H_{2}SO_{4(aq)}\rightarrow 2H^{+}_{aq}+SO_{4(aq)}^{2-}$
- The $\rightarrow$ shows that it is fully dissociating.

Weak Acids:
- Weak acids partially dissociate in solution.
$CH_{3}COOH_{(aq)}\rightleftharpoons H^{+}_{(aq)}+CH_{3}COO^-_{(aq)}$
- Weak acids may contain lots of hydrogen atoms, but the hydrogen donated tends to come from a carboxylic acid group (-COOH).

Examples of Acids:  
$HCl_{(aq)}$ Hydrochloric acid  
$H_{2}SO_{4(aq)}$ Sulfuric acid  
$HNO_{3(aq)}$ Nitric acid  
$CH_{3}COOH_{(aq)}$ Ethanoic acid  
$CHOOH_{(aq)}$ Methanoic acid  
$C_{6}H_{8}O_{7(aq)}$ Citric acid  

---
## 2.2.2 Bases and Alkalis
- Some alkalis contain hydroxide ions as part of their structure. When they dissolve, these are released into the solution. 
- Some alkalis react with water to produce solutions containing hydroxide ions.

Metal Hydroxides: 
Metal hydroxides are bases with the following exceptions: group 1 metal hydroxides, strontium hydroxide, calcium hydroxide (partially soluble), barium hydroxide and ammonium hydroxide. The exceptions are alkalis. 

Metal Oxides: 
Metal oxides are bases with the following exceptions which are all soluble: group 1 metal oxides, calcium oxide and barium oxide. The exceptions react with water to form metal hydroxide solutions which then react with acids in the same way as the metal hydroxides. 

Metal Carbonates: 
- Metal carbonates are bases.
- Group 1 metal carbonates and ammonium carbonate are soluble, their solutions are also alkalis.
- Reactions between carbonates and acids are often easy to observe, as they fizz. 

Ammonia: 
- Ammonia gas is a base which dissolves readily in water to form ammonia solution, an alkali. 
- Its reactions with acids only form salts and no other products.
- Ammonia solution is also known as ammonium hydroxide.

---
## 2.2.3 Predicting Observations
Describing observations: 
1) Before: states(s,l,g,aq) and colours/colourless. 
2) During: effervescence, dissolving, disappearing, precipitation, formation of layers. 
3) After: states(s,l,g,aq) and colours/colourless 
   - If a reactant is in excess, there will be some left over at the end of the reaction.
   - If a colourful solution becomes colourless, it decolourises. 
 
 Predicting observations from equations: 
 1) Write a balanced symbol equation using state symbols. 
 2) Describe what you would see as the reaction takes place. 
     - Group 1 and 2 compounds are white when solid (the transition metals are the colourful ones)
     - All group 1 compounds are soluble in water and give colourless solutions.
     - All chlorides are soluble in water except AgCl.
    
---
## 2.2.4 Salt Preparation
There are 3 common methods of making salts: 
1. Making an insoluble salt by mixing 2 soluble ionic compounds. 
2. Making a soluble salt by mixing a solid insoluble base and a soluble acid solution. 
3. Making a soluble salt by mixing a soluble base solution and a soluble acid solution.

Method 1: Making an insoluble salt: 
1. Make up solutions of your starting materials (must contain each of the ions.) 
2. Mix solutions together. This will produce the insoluble salts as a precipitate. 
3. Filter off the solid, wash with water and dry. 

Method 2: Making a soluble salt using an insoluble base: 
1. Add excess solid to the acid solution. 
2. When the reaction has finished (all the acid used up), filter off the excess solid. 
3. Heat gently until crystallisation starts. 
4. Allow mixture to cool and solid crystals to form. 
- Using excess base ensures no acid remains, and the excess insoluble base can be easily removed by filtration.
- The insoluble base must contain the metal ion, and select the appropriate acid. 

Method 3: Making a soluble salt using an alkali and an acid. 
1. Follow [[2.3 The Mole#^ddf9f5|titration method]] 
2. Repeat titration using mean titre without indicator. 
3. Heat final solution in an evaporating dish gently until the first crystals start to form. 
4. Leave the solution to cool and fully evaporate.

---
## 2.2.5 Ionic Equations
- Ionic equations show reactions without spectator ions.  
1) Separate all ionic aqueous substances/acids into ions (s, l, g remain the same). 
2) Identify any spectator ions.
3) Remove the spectator ions, leaving the ionic equation.