# Contents
[[2.3 The Mole#Equations|Equations]]  
[[2.3 The Mole#Notes|Notes]]

---
[[Module 2#2 3 The Mole|Definitions]]

  
## Equations
Avogrado's constant=6.02$\times 10^{23}$  
R=8.314  
$n(mol)=\frac{m(g)}{Mr(gmol^{-1})}$  
concentration(moldm$^{-3})=\frac{moles(mol)}{volume(dm^{3})}$  
At rtp: volume(dm$^3$)=moles(mol)$\times$ 24  
PV=nRT where P is pressure in Pa, V is volume in m$^{3}$, n is mol, T is temperature in K.  
uncertainty$=0.5\times$smallest division on scale
total uncertainty$=$uncertainty per reading$\times$number of readings taken  
percentage error $=\frac{total\ uncertainty}{value\ measured}$

## Notes
- The formula of ionic compounds is always written as the empirical formula.
- The formula of ionic compounds is always written as the molecular formula.
- In aqueous solutions, the solvent is water. (aq)
- For a solute to dissolve, the forces of attraction in the solution must be stronger than the bonds/intermolecular forces broken in the solvent and solute. 

Finding the Empirical Formula: 
1) Draw table. 
2) Add any information you know from the question/periodic table. 
3) Calculate the moles of each element. 
4) Divide each value for moles by the smallest number of moles to get a rough ratio. 
5) Use ratio to write the empirical formula of the substance. 
6) Divide Mr given in question by Mr of empirical formula. 
7) Multiply up the empirical formula if necessary. 

Finding reacting masses: 
1) Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction. 
2) Calculate the moles of known reactant/product. 
3) Calculate the moles of unknown reactant/product. 
4) Convert the number of moles into grams for the final answer. 

Making a standard solution:  ^225887
1) Weigh out the solute into a small beaker. 
2) Fully dissolve the solute into a minimum amount of solvent. Stir with glass rod. 
3) Pour the solution into a volumetric flask, wash the glass rod and beaker into the flask using more solvent. 
4) Top up the flask using a teat pipette until the meniscus is sitting on the line of the flask. 

Recording measurements:  ^fc2a08
- Digital device → record all digits shown incl 0s. 
- Non-digital device → record all digits shown plus one estimated digit.
- Record all data in a table with quantity and unit separated by a / in the heading.
- All data related to the same quantity must have the same number of dps. 

Uncertainties and errors: 
- Procedural - Non quantifiable, to do with experiment method. 
- Measurement - Quantifiable, to do with measurements taken. 

Reducing percentage error: 
- Reduce uncertainty by using different equipment. 
- Increase value measured by using more material (smaller percentage error). 

Titration Method:  ^ddf9f5
1) Rinse and fill burette with one of the solutions (normally titrant) 
2) Rinse and use a volumetric pipette to transfer a fixed quantity of the the other solution (normally analyte) into a conical flask. 
3) Add any additional reactants or indications (specify which indicator).
4) Perform rough titration to give a general idea of the expected titre.
5) Run the solution in the burette into the conical flask, adding dropwise near the endpoint until a colour change is observed.
6) Continue until 2 concordant (within ±0.10cm3 ) titres are recorded.

Gas Volumes: 
- All gases will occupy the same volume per mole at rtp (room temperature and pressure). 
-     This volume is 24dm3 . - rtp is 25c and 100,000Pa. 
- The ideal gas law works best with low pressure and high temperature. Gases tend to act ideally at rtp though.
- The volume of a gas increases as the temperature increases.
- The volume of a gas decreases as the pressure increases.
- The volume of a gas increases as the number of moles increases.
- An ideal gas would have no volume → the molecules take up no space.
- The ideal gas equation assumes that there are no intermolecular forces.