Reverb is an effect which has been used in music for centuries. Before the advent of modern technology, ampitheatres, theatres, churches, and other live music venues were specifically designed to have nice acoustics and allow the sound to travel far. 

In the 1930s-50s, reverb wasn't often used in commercial tracks because the speaker technology available to consumers couldn't reproduce the sound properly. 

It first started to be used in music recordings in the 1950s, with the invention of reverb chambers by Bill Putnam Sr in 1947. Reverb chambers consist of an underground concrete room with a speaker and mic(s). Sound is played out through the speaker and the wet signal is rerecorded with the mics. This allowed the mixing engineer to have both wet and dry signals that can be manipulated.However, this was not very practical because reverb chambers were very expensive to build and take up a lot of space. 

Technology quickly moved on, and plate reverb (EMT 140 in 1957), as well as spring reverb (1930s-) were invented. These both rely on passing the signal through a medium (metal spring or plate) and then rerecording it with a transducer pickup. They both have a characteristic bright sound, although spring reverb tends to sound more "bouncy". Plate reverb characteristics can be changed by adjusting the dimensions of the plate. Spring reverb can be adjusted by changing the spring length or tension. Due to the small size and portability of spring reverb, it became popular in guitar amplifiers, and was licensed by Fender. Additionally, it was used in Moog synths. 

Moving onwards to the 80s, digital reverb became possible. The first algorithmic digital reverb was invented by EMT in 1976. This consisted of many bucket brigade circuits, with customisable reverb lengths, wet/dry balance, etc. However, plate/spring reverb were still extremely popular. With the invention of large scale multitrack analogue recording, it became possible to do effects such as reverse reverb and gated reverb. Reverse reverb was used for artistic effect, and gated reverb was often used on drums to give them a more natural sound whilst keeping the track "tight" in terms of timing.

As technology became even more advanced and the limitations of hardware lessened, convolution reverb became more widely available. This is an emulation of a real space which has been sampled by IR. A white noise or pink noise sample is played in the space and then recorded and sampled. This is used by the computer to emulate the space. It tends to be the most processor heavy out of all the types of reverb. DAWs commonly have plug-ins of all types of reverb, allowing the modern producer many more options than engineers of the past. It also ensures that older types of reverb don't fade into obscurity.