# Contents
[[4.1 Alkanes#4 1 1 Naming Molecules|4.1.1 Naming Molecules]]  
[[4.1 Alkanes#4 1 2 Reactions of Alkanes with Halogens Radical Substitution|4.1.2 Reactions of Alkenes with Halogens]]  

---
## 4.1.1 Naming Molecules
[[Module 4#Key Definitions|Definitions]]  
- It is a systematic naming system, comprised of a stem, suffix and prefix. 
- Carbon atoms in the chain must be numbered in such a way that the functional group has the lowest possible number. 
- Haloalkanes are named like regular alkanes, but with prefixes fluoro-, chloro-, bromo- and iodo-. 

How to name molecules:
1) Identify the longest continuous chain (parent chain) and name it. 
2) Identify any side group and name them with stem + yl, e.g. methyl. 
3) Number the side groups by the carbon they are attached to in the main chain, keeping the numbers as low as possible. 
4) Put the side groups and their positional numbers at the front of the name, in alphabetical order of side group name. Use di/tri/tetra if there are several identical side groups.

- There are 3 types of structural isomerism: chain, position (of functional group) and (type of) functional group.

---
## 4.1.2 Reactions of Alkanes with Halogens (Radical Substitution)
- Alkanes react with halogens to produce (mono)haloalkanes and hydrogen halides. 
- It is a substitution reaction. (CH4 + Br2 → CH3Br + HBr) 
- This reaction only works in the presence of high energy UV light.
	- The UV light is needed to break bonds in the halogen molecules. 
	- There is enough UV light that it will react slowly in sunlight, but it occurs quicker in the middle and upper atmosphere (above the ozone layer). 
- The mechanism for this reaction is called radical substitution.
- It occurs in 3 steps: initiation, propagation and termination. 


1) Initiation 
	- The bond in the halogen is broken homolytically, e.g. Br$_2$ → 2Br· 
	-  In the initiation step, a non-radical is split into radicals, so only radicals appear on the rhs of the equation. 

2) Propagation 
	i) The alkane reacts with a halogen radical, producing a hydrogen halide and an alkane radical, e.g. CH$_4$ + Br· → HBr + CH$_3$· 
	- In other words, a single atom from the organic reactant becomes attracted to the radical, leaving behind the rest of the molecule as a radical. 
	
	ii) The organic reactant radical reacts with a halogen molecule, forming a haloalkane and remaking the halogen radical, e.g. CH$_3$ · +Br$_2$ → CH$_3$Br + Br· 
	- Radicals appear on both sides of the equation. 
	
	
3) Termination 
	- Radicals are only removed from the reaction when they collide with another radical. 
	- As the radical concentration is normally much lower than the organic molecule concentration, this stage has a low likelihood of occurring.

Full example mechanism:
Initiation:
Br$_2$ → 2Br· 

Propagation:
CH$_4$ + Br· → HBr + CH$_3$· 
CH$_3$ · +Br$_2$ → CH$_3$Br + Br· 

Termination:
2Br· -> Br$_{2}$
2CH$_3$ · -> C$_2$H$_6$
CH$_3$ · + Br· -> CH$_3$Br